Jeffrey Rubenstein


Tue, Sep 1, 8:35 PM (12 hours ago)





to me






Hi
Here are answers to the first four questions. I will get to the fifth, the list of 25 stories, tomorrow I hope. 


1. Mishnah stories. You told us a story inside a Mishnah belongs with Mishnah stories. In Gittin the same ma'aseh often appears twice — once in the Mishnah and again where the Gemara quotes it back (10a/10b, 45b/46a, 74a/74b) — so we catalogue one story twice. One entry or two, and which text would you cite?

These cases should optimally go with the stories of the Mishnah, not the Talmud. That is, 10a would go with the stories in the Mishnah, and 10b, as you note, is the Talmud quoting the Mishnah, so it would not have to be counted separately.  Ideally, if we run the program on all of rabbinic literature, the story would be listed with the stories of the Mishnah, as Mishnah Gittin 1:5 with a parallel in bavli Gittin 10b. That said, I think for now the story that appears in the Talmud quoting the Mishnah (in this case 10b), could be listed with the talmudic stories from Gittin,  as it is a talmudic passage.  10a is just the Mishnah itself, that the printers included in the printing of the Talmud, but not technically part of the Talmud. So let's say for now the second instances (Gittin 10b, 46a 74b), where the Talmud quotes the story from the Mishnah, can be included.  

-2. Passages where only speech happens. You wrote in July that these are not stories. Your 2005 list includes them — Gittin 38b (אמר רבה: בהני תלת מילי), 57a (the exchange on the land's fertility), and 57a (Beitar, which opens with a custom). Three of our four misses are exactly this. In, out, or in with a borderline flag?

This is a tricky question. Sometimes dialogue can be counted as stories (by some theorists at least) when there is conflict and implied change. But these would always be borderline. Unfortunately there are no real hard and fast rules, that is, unless we make one.  These lists, as I said, are provisional, so there may be some mistakes. Anyway, as to these cases:

   (a) 57a, Beitar, is clearly a story. After the custom you have the one time event--- One day the emperor's daughter....

Beitar was destroyed on account of a shaft from a carriage. The Gemara explains that it was customary in Beitar that when a boy was born they would plant a cedar tree and when a girl was born they would plant a cypress [tornita]. And when they would later marry each other they would cut down these trees and construct a wedding canopy for them with their branches. One day the emperor’s daughter passed by there and the shaft of the carriage in which she was riding broke. Her attendants chopped down a cedar from among those trees and brought it to her. Owing to the importance that they attached to their custom, the residents of Beitar came and fell upon them and beat them. The attendants came and said to the emperor: The Jews have rebelled against you. The emperor then came against them in war

(b) 57a the exchange on fertility.  I agree that this is not a story and should not have been included. The list was wrong.  Great to have the AI correct it!

(c) In 38b, the dialogue includes a story, in R. Yohanan's statement, that there were two families who set their meals at the wrong times and were uprooted. (two actions, causal connection)

In connection with this issue, Rabba said: With these three matters homeowners become impoverished: That they emancipate their slaves; and that they inspect their property on Shabbat; and that they set their meals on Shabbat at the time of the sermon in the study hall, so that they miss it, as Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba says that Rabbi Yoḥanan says: There were two families in Jerusalem, one that set its meal on Shabbat and one that set its meal on the eve of Shabbat, and both of them were uprooted. One family was uprooted because they caused the suspension of Torah study, and the other was uprooted because by eating their meal on Shabbat eve, they did not properly distinguish between Shabbat and Shabbat eve.


-3. The opening formula. Is תניא / אמר רב יהודה אמר רב part of the story you would publish, or the frame around it? We tried to settle it with a rule; it fixed nine boundaries and broke eight, because you yourself go both ways.

Here the lists were sloppy and preliminary, and we had not worked this out. Basically it could go either way. These opening formulae are not technically part of the stories. But they are important, as, for example, תניא indicates the Talmud thinks the story is Tannaitic. So ideally they should be included.  Likewise, אמר רב יהודה אמר רב, attributes the story (perhaps mistakenly) to Rav Yehudah in the name of Rav, which might be significant to a scholar. If not too much trouble, we should include them. 

-4. Two passages we propose and you do not. Gittin 43a — Rabba bar Rav Huna publicly retracts after Rav Ḥisda challenges him; Gittin 25a — מעשה, וקדמו בנות לבנים. Stories?

Gittin 43a. Probably not a story, although could be "low confidence." It is really all speech except for Rav Huna "placing an interpreter", that is, a speaker, to broadcast his words. But that is the only action. However, there is some conflict and the retraction. So maybe "low confidence" but no more.

Gittin 25a: Yes, this should be "high confidence." It is very terse but could be a story. (It depends a little on how it is understood. But should be included in our database for scholars to make their own assessment)

All the best

Jeff
